---
layout: post
title: "My First 10K"
description:
tags: [impossible]
comments: true
share: true
date: 2015-08-30
---

I ran my first 10K race today at the 2015 Panerathon in Youngstown, OH. The following describes how it went.

*Pro-tip*: Don't eat a full pizza AND Chipotle the night before running a race. 

* **Mile 0:** Blast off to the bass drop of [Calvin Harris's Sweet Nothing Remix](https://youtu.be/17ozSeGw-fY?t=108)
* **Mile 0 - 1:** Pew, pew, pew, I keep passing people. Such slowpokes. This is fun. Clock fastest mile time at 7:34.
* **Mile 1 - 2:** Oh noes, we got some hills. Listen to Matt and just put one step in front of another instead of trying to race up.
* **Mile 2:** My average mile time is down to 8:32. The winner of the race passes me going the other way. He is on Mile 4. He is fast.
* **Mile 2 - 3:** There's a stitch in my side. I should stop. I slow down. The next song my phone plays is [I Can't Stop by Flux Pavilion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzExWz7KP5M). I don't stop. 
* **Mile 3.1:** Halfway point. If this was a 5K race, it would be my slowest one so far. All those slowpokes are passing me now.
* **Mile 3 - 4:** I force myself to smile, which releases endorphins and keeps me going.
* **Mile 4:** DJ Snake boosts me into a mini sprint for three seconds. My body's not having it. Throw up in my mouth a little. Hold the gates! Oh no, here comes the second wave. Stop and expel breakfast by the side of the road. This is a hard reset. Feeling good.
* **Mile 4 - 5:** I've found a good pace. Follow the magic of yoga pants and a tutu for a bit. Aw, she had to stop. Maybe I'll just follow this guy for a while. Nope, there he goes. Maybe I can keep up with this old fella. Nope, there he goes. Who's the slowpoke now?
* **Mile 5 - 5.5:** The Return of the Stitch. Take Matt's advice and run the rest of the race with my thumb jammed into my abdomen. I'm not stopping now.
* **Mile 5.5 - 6:** I've been spending too much time indoors lately, so I get my tan on with the mid-morning sun. 
* **Mile 6:** Turn the last corner. Time to sprint home. I only go about 100 meters before the dry-heaving starts again. Ha! There's nothing left in there now stomach! I feel like I'm going to pass out. Stop 0.1 miles from the finish. Friendly racer gives me a boost. Look up and see that yoga pants and tutu has passed me. No! 
* **Mile 6.2:** Full sprint and finish ahead of her. It's over. Final time 54:16. I was shooting for 48:00 but that's good enough for now.

**Next stop:** Nationwide Half Marathon in October. 
